Counsel for Petitioner :- Shivanshu Goswami
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Shishir Jain
1. Heard Sri S.C. Misra, learned Senior Advocate assisted by
Sri Shivanshu Goswami, learned counsel for the petitioner as
well as learned Standing Counsel for respondent nos. 1, 2 and 4
and Sri Shishir Jain, Advocate has accepted notice on behalf of
respondent nos. 3 and 4.
2. By means of present writ petition the petitioner has assailed
order dated 01.06.2020, passed by the State Government
suspending the petitioner in contemplation of departmental
proceedings initiated against him, who at the relevant time was
working on the post of General Manager, Ayodhya Division,
3. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner
that charge sheet was submitted to the petitioner on 25.11.2020,
in pursuance to which petitioner submitted his reply on
22.01.2021. According to the petitioner inquiry proceedings
have not been concluded despite the inquiry report having been
submitted to the Disciplinary Authority in March, 2021, but till
date show cause notice has neither been given to the petitioner
nor disciplinary proceedings have been concluded.
4. It is next submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that
petitioner has been kept under suspension for more than one
and half years which is an extremely long time and till date
disciplinary proceedings have not been concluded. There is no
reason to keep the petitioner under suspension for such a long
period, as petitioner would be superannuated on 31st December,
2022 and likely to retire during his suspension, which will
adversely effect his post retiral dues and other service benefits
admissible to him, to which he would have been entitled in
absence of suspension order.
5. Considering the submissions of learned counsel for the
petitioner, this Court is of the view that the pendency of
disciplinary proceedings where inquiry report has been
submitted more than one and half years back, which is
extremely unreasonable long time for the disciplinary
proceedings to remain pending. It is also noticed that in case
inquiry report was submitted in March, 2021, there seems to be
no reason as to why disciplinary proceedings have not been
concluded within a reasonable time, thereafter.
6. This Court by its previous order had directed learned
Standing Counsel to seek instructions with regard to the reasons
for pendency of disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner
for such a long length of time.
7. Instructions from the State Government have been forwarded
to the learned Standing Counsel on 14.11.2022. The instructions
are taken on record. In the instructions it has been stated that
inquiry report was submitted on 18.03.2021 and report of SIT
was also received on 30.05.2022 and it is stated that two weeks
time is required for passing final orders in the matter.
8. Considering the fact the disciplinary proceedings are in the
final stage and also in the light of request made in the
instructions received by learned Standing Counsel, the writ
petition is disposed of with direction to the competent authority
to conclude the inquiry proceedings within maximum period of
three weeks from the date of production of certified copy of this
order before the competent authority/disciplinary authority.
9. In case disciplinary proceedings are not concluded within the
time prescribed above, the impugned order of suspension dated
01.06.2020, would cease to exist.